9.9 Explorations
467
9.9
Explorations
9.37 Explore the details of subroutine calls in the GNU Ada translator gnat. Pay
particular attention to the more complex language features, including decla-
rations in nested blocks (Section 3.3.2), dynamic-size arrays (Section 8.2.2),
in/out parameters (Section 9.3.1), optional and named parameters (Sec-
tion 9.3.3), generic subroutines (Section 7.3.1), exceptions (Section 9.4),
and concurrency (“Launch-at-Elaboration,” Section 13.2.3).
9.38 If you were designing a new imperative language, what set of parameter
modes would you pick? Why?
9.39 Learn about references and the reference assignment operator in PHP. Dis-
cuss the similarities and differences between these and the references of
C++. In particular, note that assignments in PHP can change the object
to which a reference variable refers. Why does PHP allow this but C++ does
not?
9.40 Learn about pointers to methods in C++. What are they useful for? How
do they differ from a C# delegate that encapsulates a method?
9.41 Find manuals for several languages with exceptions and look up the set of
predeﬁned exceptions—those that may be raised automatically by the lan-
guage implementation. Discuss the differences among the sets deﬁned by
different languages. If you were designing an exception-handling facility,
what exceptions, if any, would you make predeﬁned? Why?
9.42 Eiffel is an exception to the “replacement model” of exception handling. Its
rescue clause is superﬁcially similar to a catch block, but it must either
retry the routine to which it is attached or allow the exception to propa-
gate up the call chain. Put another way, the default behavior when control
falls off the end of the rescue clause is to reraise the exception. Read up
on “Design by Contract,” the programming methodology supported by this
exception-handling mechanism. Do you agree or disagree with the argu-
ment against replacement? Explain.
9.43 Learn the details of nonlocal control transfer in Common Lisp. Write a tu-
torial that explains tagbody and go; block and return-from; catch and
throw; and restart-case, restart-bind, handler-case, handler-
bind, find-restart, invoke-restart, ignore-errors, signal, and
error. What do you think of all this machinery? Is it over-kill? Be sure
to give an example that illustrates the use of handler-bind.
9.44 For Common Lisp, Modula-3, and Java, compare the semantics of unwind-
protect and try...finally. Speciﬁcally, what happens if an exception
arises within a cleanup clause?
9.45 As noted near the end of Section 9.6.2, an event-handler needs either to
execute quickly or to pass its work off to another thread. A particularly ele-
gant mechanism for the latter can be found in the async and await prim-
