# 13.4 Language-Level Constructs

13.4 Language-Level Constructs
**669**

29. Explain how a* reader–writer lock* differs from an “ordinary” lock.

30. What is a* barrier*? In what types of programs are barriers common?
31. What does it mean for an algorithm to be* nonblocking*? What advantages do
nonblocking algorithms have over algorithms based on locks?
32. What is* sequential consistency*? Why is it difﬁcult to implement?

33. What information is provided by a* memory consistency model*? What is the
relationship between hardware-level and language-level memory models?

34. Explain how to extend a preemptive uniprocessor scheduler to work correctly
on a multiprocessor.

35. What is a* spin-then-yield* lock?
36. What is a* bounded buffer*?

37. What is a* semaphore*? What operations does it support? How do* binary* and
*general* semaphores differ?

## 13.4

**Language-Level Constructs**
```
Though widely used, semaphores are also widely considered to be too “low level”
for well-structured, maintainable code. They suffer from two principal problems.
First, because their operations are simply subroutine calls, it is easy to leave one
out (e.g., on a control path with several nested if statements). Second, unless
they are hidden inside an abstraction, uses of a given semaphore tend to get scat-
tered throughout a program, making it difﬁcult to track them down for purposes
of software maintenance.
```

13.4.1** Monitors**

Monitors were suggested by Dijkstra [Dij72] as a solution to the problems of
semaphores. They were developed more thoroughly by Brinch Hansen [Bri73],
and formalized by Hoare [Hoa74] in the early 1970s. They have been incorpo-
rated into at least a score of languages, of which Concurrent Pascal [Bri75], Mod-
ula (1) [Wir77b], and Mesa [LR80] were probably the most inﬂuential.5 They

**5**
Together with Smalltalk and Interlisp, Mesa was one of three inﬂuentiallanguages to emerge from
Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center in the 1970s. All three were developed on the Alto personal
computer, which pioneered such concepts as the bitmapped display, the mouse, the graphical
user interface, WYSIWYG editing, Ethernet networking, and the laser printer. The Mesa project
was led by Butler Lampson (1943–), who played a key role in the later development of Euclid and
Cedar as well. For his contributions to personal and distributed computing, Lampson received
the ACM Turing Award in 1992.

