410
Chapter 8 Composite Types
8.11
Bibliographic Notes
While arrays are the oldest composite data type, they remain an active subject
of language design. Representative contemporary work can be found in the pro-
ceedings of the 2014 SIGPLAN International Workshop on Libraries, Languages,
and Compilers for Array Programming [Hen14]. Implementation issues for ar-
rays and records are discussed in all the standard compiler texts. Chamberlain
and Snyder describe support for sparse arrays in the ZPL programming lan-
guage [CS01].
Tombstones are due to Lomet [Lom75, Lom85]. Locks and keys are due to
Fischer and LeBlanc [FL80]. The latter also discuss how to check for various
other dynamic semantic errors in Pascal, including those that arise with variant
records.
Garbage collection remains a very active topic of research.
Much of the
ongoing work is reported at ISMM, the annual International Symposium on
Memory Management (www.sigplan.org/Conferences/ISMM).
Constant-space
(pointer-reversing) mark-and-sweep garbage collection is due to Schorr and
Waite [SW67]. Stop-and-copy collection was developed by Fenichel and Yochel-
son [FY69], based on ideas due to Minsky. Deutsch and Bobrow [DB76] de-
scribe an incremental garbage collector that avoids the “stop-the-world” phe-
nomenon. Wilson and Johnstone [WJ93] describe a later incremental collector.
The conservative collector described at the end of Section 8.5.3 is due to Boehm
and Weiser [BW88]. Cohen [Coh81] surveys garbage-collection techniques as of
1981; Wilson [Wil92b] and Jones and Lins [JL96] provide somewhat more recent
views. Bacon et al. [BCR04] argue that reference counting and tracing are really
dual views of the same underlying storage problem.
