# 8.3 Strings

8.3 Strings
**375**

out the compiler uses? Why do most language designers consider row-major
layout to be better?
16. How much of the work of computing the address of an element of an array
can be performed at compile time? How much must be performed at run
time?

## 8.3

**Strings**
In some languages, a string is simply an array of characters. In other languages,
strings have special status, with operations that are not available for arrays of
other sorts.
Scripting languages like Perl, Python, and Ruby have extensive
suites of built-in string operators and functions, including sophisticated pat-
tern matching facilities based on regular expressions.
Some special-purpose
languages—Icon, in particular—provide even more sophisticated mechanisms,
including general-purpose* generators* and backtracking search. We will consider
the string and pattern-matching facilities of scripting languages in more detail in
Section 14.4.2. Icon was discussed in Section C 6.5.4. In the remainder of the
current section we focus on the role of strings in more traditional languages.
Almost all programming languages allow literal strings to be speciﬁed as a se-
quence of characters, usually enclosed in single or double quote marks. Most lan-
guages distinguish between literal characters (often delimited with single quotes)
and literal strings (often delimited with double quotes). A few languages make no
such distinction, deﬁning a character as simply a string of length one. Most lan-
guages also provide* escape sequences* that allow nonprinting characters and quote
marks to appear inside literal strings.
C and C++ provide a very rich set of escape sequences. An arbitrary charac-
**EXAMPLE** 8.29

```
Character escapes in C
and C++
ter can be represented by a backslash followed by (a) 1 to 3 octal (base 8) digits,
(b) an x and one or more hexadecimal (base-16) digits, (c) a u and exactly four
hexadecimal digits, or (d) a U and exactly eight hexadecimal digits. The \U no-
tation is meant to capture the four-byte (32-bit) Unicode character set described
in Sidebar 7.3. The \u notation is for characters in the Basic Multilingual Plane.
Many of the most common control characters also have single-character escape
sequences, many of which have been adopted by other languages as well. For ex-
ample, \n is a line feed; \t is a tab; \r is a carriage return; \\ is a backslash.
C# omits the octal sequences of C and C++; Java also omits the 32-bit extended
sequences.
■
The set of operations provided for strings is strongly tied to the implementa-
tion envisioned by the language designer(s). Several languages that do not in gen-
eral allow arrays to change size dynamically do provide this ﬂexibility for strings.
The rationale is twofold. First, manipulation of variable-length strings is fun-
damental to a huge number of computer applications, and in some sense “de-
serves” special treatment. Second, the fact that strings are one-dimensional, have
```

