# Chapter 6: Control Flow

6 Control Flow

Having considered the mechanisms that a compiler uses to enforce se- mantic rules (Chapter 4) and the characteristics of the target machines for which compilers must generate code (Chapter 5), we now return to core issues in lan- guage design. Speciﬁcally, we turn in this chapter to the issue of control ﬂow or ordering in program execution. Ordering is fundamental to most models of com- puting. It determines what should be done ﬁrst, what second, and so forth, to accomplish some desired task. We can organize the language mechanisms used to specify ordering into several categories:

1. Sequencing: Statements are to be executed (or expressions evaluated) in a cer- tain speciﬁed order—usually the order in which they appear in the program text. 2. Selection: Depending on some run-time condition, a choice is to be made among two or more statements or expressions. The most common selection constructs are if and case (switch) statements. Selection is also sometimes referred to as alternation. 3. Iteration: A given fragment of code is to be executed repeatedly, either a cer- tain number of times, or until a certain run-time condition is true. Iteration constructs include for/do, while, and repeat loops. 4. Procedural abstraction: A potentially complex collection of control constructs (a subroutine) is encapsulated in a way that allows it to be treated as a single unit, usually subject to parameterization. 5. Recursion: An expression is deﬁned in terms of (simpler versions of) itself, ei- ther directly or indirectly; the computational model requires a stack on which to save information about partially evaluated instances of the expression. Re- cursion is usually deﬁned by means of self-referential subroutines. 6. Concurrency: Two or more program fragments are to be executed/evaluated “at the same time,” either in parallel on separate processors, or interleaved on a single processor in a way that achieves the same effect. 7. Exception handling and speculation: A program fragment is executed optimisti- cally, on the assumption that some expected condition will be true. If that con-

223

