592
Chapter 12 Logic Languages
12.1
Logic Programming Concepts
Logic programming systems allow the programmer to state a collection of axioms
from which theorems can be proven. The user of a logic program states a theorem,
or goal, and the language implementation attempts to ﬁnd a collection of axioms
and inference steps (including choices of values for variables) that together imply
the goal. Of the several existing logic languages, Prolog is by far the most widely
used.
In almost all logic languages, axioms are written in a standard form known as
EXAMPLE 12.1
Horn clauses
a Horn clause. A Horn clause consists of a head,2 or consequent term H, and a
body consisting of terms Bi:
H ←B1, B2, . . . , Bn
The semantics of this statement are that when the Bi are all true, we can deduce
that H is true as well. When reading aloud, we say “H, if B1, B2, ..., and Bn.” Horn
clauses can be used to capture most, but not all, logical statements. (We return to
the issue of completeness in Section C 12.3.)
■
In order to derive new statements, a logic programming system combines ex-
isting statements, canceling like terms, through a process known as resolution. If
EXAMPLE 12.2
Resolution
we know that A and B imply C, for example, and that C implies D, we can deduce
that A and B imply D:
C ←A, B
D ←C
D ←A, B
In general, terms like A, B, C, and D may consist not only of constants
(“Rochester is rainy”) but also of predicates applied to atoms or to variables:
rainy(Rochester), rainy(Seattle), rainy(X).
■
During resolution, free variables may acquire values through uniﬁcation with
EXAMPLE 12.3
Uniﬁcation
expressions in matching terms, much as variables acquire types in ML (Sec-
tion 7.2.4):
ﬂowery(X) ←rainy(X)
rainy(Rochester)
ﬂowery(Rochester)
In the following section we consider Prolog in more detail. We return to formal
logic, and to its relationship to Prolog, in Section C 12.3.
■
2
Note that the word “head” is used for two different things in Prolog: the head of a Horn clause
and the head of a list. The distinction between these is usually clear from context.
