612
Chapter 12 Logic Languages
“reason” in more general ways, Prolog provides a clause predicate that attempts
to match its two arguments against the head and body of some existing clause in
the database:
?- clause(snowy(X), B).
B = rainy(X), cold(X).
Here we have discovered that there is a single rule in the database whose head is a
single-argument term with functor snowy. The body of that rule is the conjunc-
tion B = rainy(X), cold(X). If there had been more such clauses, we would
have had the opportuity to ask for them them by entering semicolons. Prolog re-
quires that the ﬁrst argument to clause be sufﬁciently instantiated that its func-
tor and arity can be determined.
A clause with no body (a fact) matches the body true:
?- clause(rainy(rochester), true).
true.
Note that clause is quite different from call: it does not attempt to satisfy a
goal, but simply to match it against an existing clause:
?- clause(snowy(rochester), true).
false.
■
Various other built-in predicates can also be used to “deconstruct” the contents
of a clause. The var predicate takes a single argument; it succeeds as a goal if
and only if its argument is an uninstantiated variable. The atom and integer
predicates succeed as goals if and only if their arguments are atoms and integers,
respectively. The name predicate takes two arguments. It succeeds as a goal if and
only if its ﬁrst argument is an atom and its second is a list composed of the ASCII
codes for the characters of that atom.
12.3
Theoretical Foundations
In mathematical logic, a predicate is a function that maps constants (atoms) or
variables to the values true and false. If rainy is a predicate, for example, we might
EXAMPLE 12.34
Predicates as mathematical
objects
have rainy(Seattle) = true and rainy(Tijuana) = false. Predicate calculus provides a
notation and inference rules for constructing and reasoning about propositions
(statements) composed of predicate applications, operators (and, or, not, etc.),
and the quantiﬁers ∀and ∃. Logic programming formalizes the search for variable
values that will make a given proposition true.
■
