# About the Author

About the Author

Michael L. Scott is a professor and past chair of the Department of Computer Science at the University of Rochester. He received his Ph.D. in computer sciences in  1985 from the University of Wisconsin–Madison. From 2014–2015 he was a Visiting Scientist at Google. His research interests lie at the intersection of programming languages, operating systems, and high-level computer architecture, with an  emphasis on parallel and distributed computing. His MCS mutual exclusion lock,  co-designed with John Mellor-Crummey, is used in a variety of commercial and  academic systems. Several other algorithms, co-designed with Maged Michael,  Bill Scherer, and Doug Lea, appear in the java.util.concurrent standard library. In 2006 he and Dr. Mellor-Crummey shared the ACM SIGACT/SIGOPS  Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing.

Dr. Scott is a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery, a Fellow of  the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and a member of Usenix, the  Union of Concerned Scientists, and the American Association of University Professors. The author of more than 150 refereed publications, he served as General  Chair of the 2003 ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) and  as Program Chair of the 2007 ACM SIGPLAN Workshop on Transactional Computing (TRANSACT), the 2008 ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and  Practice of Parallel Programming (PPoPP), and the 2012 International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS). In 2001 he received the University of Rochester’s Robert and  Pamela Goergen Award for Distinguished Achievement and Artistry in Undergraduate Teaching.

