# 11.1 Compiling Generics

11.1 Compiling Generics

Broadly speaking, there are four approaches to compiling generics, as follows:

Monomorphization generates a different version of a generic function for each set of type arguments with which it is used, producing type-specialized code. This approach results in the most efficient code but requires whole-program compilation (no separate compilation) and may increase code size. Unfortu- nately, monomorphization is incompatible with first-class generics because it is not always possible to determine which generic functions are used with which type arguments during compilation. (It can be done at runtime with just-in-time compilation.) Monomorphization is used to compile C++ templates (Stroustrup 1988) and generic functions in NESL (Blelloch et al. 1993) and ML (Weeks 2006). Uniform representation generates one version of each generic function and requires all values to have a common boxed format, such as the tagged values of type Any in LAny. Both generic and monomorphic code is compiled similarly to code in a dynamically typed language (like LDyn), in which primitive operators require their arguments to be projected from Any and their results to be injected into Any. (In object-oriented languages, the projection is accomplished via virtual method dispatch.) The uniform representation approach is compatible with separate com- pilation and with first-class generics. However, it produces the least efficient code because it introduces overhead in the entire program. This approach is used in Java (Bracha et al. 1998), CLU (Liskov et al. 1979; Liskov 1993), and some implementations of ML (Cardelli 1984; Appel and MacQueen 1987). Mixed representation generates one version of each generic function, using a boxed representation for type variables. However, monomorphic code is compiled as usual (as in Lλ), and conversions are performed at the boundaries between monomorphic code and polymorphic code (for example, when a generic function is instantiated and called). This approach is compatible with separate compi- lation and first-class generics and maintains efficiency in monomorphic code. The trade-off is increased overhead at the boundary between monomorphic and generic code. This approach is used in implementations of ML (Leroy 1992) and Java, starting in Java 5 with the addition of autoboxing. Type passing uses the unboxed representation in both monomorphic and generic code. Each generic function is compiled to a single function with extra parameters that describe the type arguments. The type information is used by the generated code to determine how to access the unboxed values at runtime. This approach is used in implementation of Napier88 (Morrison et al. 1991) and ML (Harper and Morrisett 1995). Type passing is compatible with separate compilation and first-class generics and maintains the efficiency for monomorphic code. There is runtime overhead in polymorphic code from dispatching on type information.

In this chapter we use the mixed representation approach, partly because of its favorable attributes and partly because it is straightforward to implement using the tools that we have already built to support gradual typing. The work of compiling

