# 1.8 Exercises

1.8 Exercises

1.1 Errors in a computer program can be classiﬁed according to when they are detected and, if they are detected at compile time, what part of the compiler detects them. Using your favorite imperative language, give an example of each of the following. (a) A lexical error, detected by the scanner (b) A syntax error, detected by the parser (c) A static semantic error, detected by semantic analysis (d) A dynamic semantic error, detected by code generated by the compiler (e) An error that the compiler can neither catch nor easily generate code to catch (this should be a violation of the language deﬁnition, not just a program bug) 1.2 Consider again the Pascal tool set distributed by Niklaus Wirth (Exam- ple 1.15). After successfully building a machine language version of the Pascal compiler, one could in principle discard the P-code interpreter and the P-code version of the compiler. Why might one choose not to do so? 1.3 Imperative languages like Fortran and C are typically compiled, while scripting languages, in which many issues cannot be settled until run time, are typically interpreted. Is interpretation simply what one “has to do” when compilation is infeasible, or are there actually some advantages to interpret- ing a language, even when a compiler is available? 1.4 The gcd program of Example 1.20 might also be written

int main() { int i = getint(), j = getint(); while (i != j) { if (i > j) i = i % j; else j = j % i; } putint(i); }

Does this program compute the same result? If not, can you ﬁx it? Under what circumstances would you expect one or the other to be faster? 1.5 Expanding on Example 1.25, trace an interpretation of the gcd program on the inputs 12 and 8. Which syntax tree nodes are visited, in which order? 1.6 Both interpretation and code generation can be performed by traversal of a syntax tree. Compare these two kinds of traversals. In what ways are they similar/different? 1.7 In your local implementation of C, what is the limit on the size of inte- gers? What happens in the event of arithmetic overﬂow? What are the

