4.10 Bibliographic Notes
215
Also discuss the limitations of Ada/Ed, and expand on the potential role of
formal semantics in language design, development, and prototype imple-
mentation.
4.35 Version 5 of the Scheme language manual [KCR+98] included a formal def-
inition of Scheme in denotational semantics. How long is this deﬁnition,
compared to the more conventional deﬁnition in English? How readable is
it? What do the length and the level of readability say about Scheme? About
denotational semantics? (For more on denotational semantics, see the texts
of Stoy [Sto77] or Gordon [Gor79].)
Version 6 of the manual [SDF+07] switched to operational semantics.
How does this compare to the denotational version? Why do you suppose
the standards committee made the change? (For more information, see the
paper by Matthews and Findler [MF08].)
4.36–4.37 In More Depth.
4.10
Bibliographic Notes
Much of the early theory of attribute grammars was developed by Knuth [Knu68].
Lewis, Rosenkrantz, and Stearns [LRS74] introduced the notion of an L-
attributed grammar. Watt [Wat77] showed how to use marker symbols to em-
ulate inherited attributes in a bottom-up parser. Jazayeri, Ogden, and Rounds
[JOR75] showed that exponential time may be required in the worst case to dec-
orate a parse tree with arbitrary attribute ﬂow. Articles by Courcelle [Cou84] and
Engelfriet [Eng84] survey the theory and practice of attribute evaluation.
Language-based program editing based on attribute grammars was pioneered
by the Synthesizer Generator [RT88] (a follow-on to the language-speciﬁc Cor-
nell Program Synthesizer [TR81]) of Reps and Teitelbaum. Magpie [SDB84] was
an early incremental compiler, again based on attribute grammars. Meyerovich
et al. [MTAB13] have recently used attribute grammars to parallelize a variety of
tree-traversal tasks—notably for web page rendering and GPU-accelerated ani-
mation.
Action routines to implement many language features can be found in the
texts of Fischer et al. or Appel [App97]. Further notes on attribute grammars
can be found in the texts of Cooper and Torczon [CT04, pp. 171–188] or Aho et
al. [ALSU07, Chap. 5].
Marcotty, Ledgard, and Bochmann [MLB76] provide an early survey of formal
notations for programming language semantics. More detailed but still somewhat
dated treatment can be found in the texts of Winskel [Win93] and Slonneger and
Kurtz [SK95]. Nipkow and Klein cover the topic from a modern and mathe-
matically rigorous perspective, integrating their text with an executable theorem-
proving system [NK15].
The seminal paper on axiomatic semantics is by Hoare [Hoa69]. An excellent
book on the subject is Gries’s The Science of Programming [Gri81]. The seminal
paper on denotational semantics is by Scott and Strachey [SS71]. Early texts on
the subject include those of Stoy [Sto77] and Gordon [Gor79].
This page intentionally left blank
