# 4.9 Explorations

214 Chapter 4 Semantic Analysis

so. Be sure to think carefully about your coercion rules. In the expression my_int + my_real, for example, how will you know whether to coerce the integer to be a real, or to coerce the real to be an integer? 4.24 Explain the need for the A : B notation on the left-hand sides of produc- tions in a tree grammar. Why isn’t similar notation required for context-free grammars? 4.25 A potential objection to the tree attribute grammar of Example 4.17 is that it repeatedly copies the entire symbol table from one node to another. In this particular tiny language, it is easy to see that the referencing environment never shrinks: the symbol table changes only with the addition of new iden- tiﬁers. Exploiting this observation, show how to modify the pseudocode of Figure 4.14 so that it copies only pointers, rather than the entire symbol table. 4.26 Your solution to the previous exercise probably doesn’t generalize to lan- guages with nontrivial scoping rules. Explain how an AG such as that in Figure 4.14 might be modiﬁed to use a global symbol table similar to the one described in Section C 3.4.1. Among other things, you should consider nested scopes, the hiding of names in outer scopes, and the requirement (not enforced by the table of Section C 3.4.1) that variables be declared be- fore they are used.

4.27–4.31 In More Depth. 4.9 Explorations

4.32 One of the most inﬂuential applications of attribute grammars was the Cor- nell Synthesizer Generator [Rep84, RT88]. Learn how the Generator used attribute grammars not only for incremental update of semantic informa- tion in a program under edit, but also for automatic creation of language based editors from formal language speciﬁcations. How general is this tech- nique? What applications might it have beyond syntax-directed editing of computer programs? 4.33 The attribute grammars used in this chapter are all quite simple. Most are S- or L-attributed. All are noncircular. Are there any practical uses for more complex attribute grammars? How about automatic attribute eval- uators? Using the Bibliographic Notes as a starting point, conduct a survey of attribute evaluation techniques. Where is the line between practical tech- niques and intellectual curiosities? 4.34 The ﬁrst validated Ada implementation was the Ada/Ed interpreter from New York University [DGAFS+80]. The interpreter was written in the set- based language SETL [SDDS86] using a denotational semantics deﬁnition of Ada. Learn about the Ada/Ed project, SETL, and denotational semantics. Discuss how the use of a formal deﬁnition aided the development process.

