# 11.12 Bibliographic Notes

11.29 Investigate the compilation of functional programs. What special issues arise? What techniques are used to address them? Starting places for your search might include the compiler texts of Appel [App97], Wilhelm and Maurer [WM95], and Grune et al. [GBJ+12].

11.30–11.32 In More Depth. 11.12 Bibliographic Notes

Lisp, the original functional programming language, dates from the work of Mc- Carthy and his associates in the late 1950s. Bibliographic references for Erlang, Haskell, Lisp, Miranda, ML, OCaml, Scheme, Single Assignment C, and Sisal can be found in Appendix A. Historically important dialects of Lisp include Lisp 1.5 [MAE+65], MacLisp [Moo78] (no relation to the Apple Macintosh), and In- terlisp [TM81]. The book by Abelson and Sussman [AS96], long used for introductory pro- gramming classes at MIT and elsewhere, is a classic guide to fundamental pro- gramming concepts, and to functional programming in particular. Additional historical references can be found in the paper by Hudak [Hud89], which surveys the ﬁeld from the point of view of Haskell. The lambda calculus was introduced by Church in 1941 [Chu41]. A classic reference is the text of Curry and Feys [CF58]. Barendregt’s book [Bar84] is a standard modern reference. Michaelson [Mic89] provides an accessible intro- duction to the formalism, together with a clear explanation of its relationship to Lisp and ML. Stansifer [Sta95, Sec. 7.6] provides a good informal discussion and correctness proof for the ﬁxed-point combinator Y (see Exercise C 11.21). John Backus, one of the original developers of Fortran, argued forcefully for a move to functional programming in his 1977 Turing Award lecture [Bac78]. His functional programming notation is known as FP. Peyton Jones [Pey87, Pey92], Wilhelm and Maurer [WM95, Chap. 3], Appel [App97, Chap. 15], and Grune et al. [GBJ+12, Chap. 7] discuss the implementation of functional languages. Pey- ton Jones’s paper on the “awkward squad” [Pey01] is widely considered the deﬁni- tive introduction to monads in Haskell. While Lisp dates from the early 1960s, it is only in recent years that functional languages have seen widespread use in large commercial systems. Wadler [Wad98a, Wad98b] describes the situation as of the late 1990s, when the tide began to turn. Descriptions of many subsequent projects can be found in the proceedings of the Commercial Users of Functional Programming workshop (cufp.galois.com), held annually since 2004. The Journal of Functional Programming also publishes a special category of articles on commercial use. Armstrong reports [Arm07] that the Ericsson AXD301, a telephone switching system comprising more than two million lines of Erlang code, has achieved an astonishing “nine nines” level of reliability—the equivalent of less than 32 ms of downtime per year.

