# 14.2 Problem Domains

**704**
Chapter 14* Scripting Languages*

much more fundamental, and have much more direct support. Perl, for one,
provides well over 100 built-in commands that access operating system func-
tions for input and output, ﬁle and directory manipulation, process manage-
ment, database access, sockets, interprocess communication and synchroniza-
tion, protection and authorization, time-of-day clock, and network commu-
nication. These built-in commands are generally a good bit easier to use than
corresponding library calls in languages like C.
*Sophisticated pattern matching and string manipulation.* In keeping with their
text processing and report generation ancestry, and to facilitate the manip-
ulation of textual input and output for external programs, scripting languages
tend to have extraordinarily rich facilities for pattern matching, search, and
string manipulation. Typically these are based on* extended regular expressions*.
We discuss them further in Section 14.4.2.
*High-level data types.* High-level data types like sets, bags, dictionaries, lists, and
tuples are increasingly common in the standard library packages of conven-
tional programming languages. A few languages (notably C++) allow users to
redeﬁne standard inﬁx operators to make these types as easy to use as more
primitive, hardware-centric types. Scripting languages go one step further by
building high-level types into the syntax and semantics of the language itself.
In most scripting languages, for example, it is commonplace to have an “array”
that is indexed by character strings, with an underlying implementation based
on hash tables. Storage is invariably garbage collected.

Much of the most rapid change in programming languages today is occurring
in scripting languages. This can be attributed to several causes, including the
continued growth of the Web, the dynamism of the open-source community, and
the comparatively low investment required to create a new scripting language.
Where a compiled, industrial-quality language like Java or C# requires a multiyear
investment by a very large programming team, a single talented designer, working
alone, can create a usable implementation of a new scripting language in only a
year or two.
Due in part to this rapid change, newer scripting languages have been able to
incorporate some of the most innovative concepts in language design. Ruby, for
example, has a uniform object model (much like Smalltalk), true iterators (like
Clu), lambda expressions, (like Lisp), array slices (like Fortran 90), structured
exception handling, multiway assignment, and reﬂection. Python has many of
these features as well, and a few that Ruby lacks, including Haskell-style list com-
prehensions.
## 14.2

**Problem Domains**
Some general-purpose languages—Scheme and Visual Basic, for example—are
widely used for scripting. Conversely, some scripting languages, including Perl,

```
ls *.pdf
```

```
The shell expands the pattern *.pdf into a list of all matching names. If there are
three of them (say fig1.pdf, fig2.pdf, and fig3.pdf), the result is equivalent
to
```

```
ls fig1.pdf fig2.pdf fig3.pdf
```

```
Filename expansion is sometimes called “globbing,” after the original Unix
glob command that implemented it. In addition to * wildcards, one can usually
specify “don’t care” or alternative characters or substrings. The pattern fig?.pdf
will match (expand to) any ﬁle(s) with a single character between the g and the
dot. The pattern fig[0-9].pdf will require that character to be a digit. The
pattern fig3.{eps,pdf} will match both fig3.eps and fig3.pdf.
■
Filename expansion is particularly useful in loops. Such loops may be typed
directly from the keyboard, or embedded in scripts intended for later execution.
Suppose, for example, that we wish to create PDF versions of all our EPS ﬁgures:1
EXAMPLE 14.4
```

```
For loops in the shell
for fig in *.eps
do
ps2pdf $fig
done
```

```
The for construct arranges for the shell variable fig to take on the names in
the expansion of *.eps, one at a time, in consecutive iterations of the loop. The
dollar sign in line 3 causes the value of fig to be expanded into the ps2pdf com-
mand before it is executed. (Interestingly, ps2pdf is itself a shell script that calls
the gs Postscript interpreter.) Optional braces can be used to separate a variable
name from following characters, as in cp $foo ${foo}_backup.
■
Multiple commands can be entered on a single line if they are separated by
EXAMPLE 14.5
```

A whole loop on one line
semicolons. The following, for example, is equivalent to the loop in the previous
example:

```
for fig in *.eps; do ps2pdf $fig; done
■
```

**1**
Postscript is a programming language developed at Adobe Systems, Inc. for the description of
images and documents (we consider it again in Sidebar 15.1). Encapsulated Postscript (EPS) is
a restricted form of Postscript intended for ﬁgures that are to be embedded in other documents.
Portable Document Format (PDF, also by Adobe) is a self-contained ﬁle format that combines a
subset of Postscript with font embedding and compression mechanisms. It is strictly less powerful
than Postscript from a computational perspective, but much more portable, and faster and easier
to render.

Subshells
evaluation. If the opening parenthesis is preceded by a dollar sign, the output of
the nested command list is expanded into the surrounding context:

