# 14.3 Scripting the World Wide Web

14.3 Scripting the World Wide Web
**727**

16. List several distinctive features of the R statistical scripting language.

```
17. Explain the meaning of the $ and @ characters at the beginning of variable
names in Perl. Explain the different meanings of $, @, and @@ in Ruby.
```

18. Which of the languages described in Section 14.2.4 uses indentation to control
syntactic grouping?

19. List several distinctive features of Python.
20. Describe, brieﬂy, how Ruby uses* blocks* and* iterators*.

21. What capabilities must a scripting language provide in order to be used for
extension?

22. Name several commercial tools that use extension languages.

## 14.3

**Scripting the World Wide Web**
Much of the content of the World Wide Web—particularly the content that is vis-
ible to search engines—is static: pages that seldom, if ever, change. But hypertext,
the abstract notion on which the Web is based, was always conceived as a way
to represent “the complex, the changing, and the indeterminate” [Nel65]. Much
of the power of the Web today lies in its ability to deliver pages that move, play
sounds, respond to user actions, or—perhaps most important—contain infor-
mation created or formatted on demand, in response to the page-fetch request.
From a programming languages point of view, simple playback of recorded
audio or video is not particularly interesting. We therefore focus our attention
here on content that is generated on the ﬂy by a program—a script—associated
with an Internet URI (uniform resource identiﬁer).4 Suppose we type a URI into
a browser on a client machine, and the browser sends a request to the appropriate
web server. If the content is dynamically created, an obvious ﬁrst question is: does
the script that creates it run on the server or the client machine? These options
are known as* server-side* and* client-side* web scripting, respectively.
Server-side scripts are typically used when the service provider wants to re-
tain complete control over the content of the page, but can’t (or doesn’t want to)
create the content in advance. Examples include the pages returned by search
engines, Internet retailers, auction sites, and any organization that provides its
clients with on-line access to personal accounts. Client-side scripts are typically
used for tasks that don’t need access to proprietary information, and are more

**4**
The term “URI” is often used interchangeably with “URL” (uniform resource locator), but the
World Wide Web Consortium distinguishes between the two. All URIs are hierarchical (multi-
part) names. URLs are one kind of URIs; they use a naming scheme that indicates where to ﬁnd
the resource. Other URIs can use other naming schemes.

### Though widely used, CGI scripts have several disadvantages:

```
5
One typically uses post type forms for one-time requests. A get type form appears a little
clumsier, because arguments are visibly embedded in the URI, but this gives it the advantage of
repeatability: it can be “bookmarked” by client browsers.
```

### The web server must launch each script as a separate program, with potentially

### signiﬁcant overhead (though a CGI script compiled to native code can be very

### fast once running).

### Because the server has little control over the behavior of a script, scripts must

### generally be installed in a trusted directory by trusted system administrators;

### they cannot reside in arbitrary locations as ordinary pages do.

