# 14.5 Summary and Concluding Remarks

52. Compare the approaches to object orientation taken by Perl 5, PHP 5, JavaScript, Python, and Ruby. 53. What is meant by the blessing of a reference in Perl?

54. What are prototypes in JavaScript? What purpose do they serve?

14.5 Summary and Concluding Remarks

Scripting languages serve primarily to control and coordinate other software components. Though their roots go back to interpreted languages of the 1960s, for many years they were largely ignored by academic computer science. With an increasing emphasis on programmer productivity, however, and with the explo- sion of the World Wide Web, scripting languages have seen enormous growth in interest and popularity, both in industry and in academia. Many signiﬁcant ad- vances have been made by commercial developers and by the open-source com- munity. Scripting languages may well come to dominate programming in the 21st century, with traditional compiled languages more and more seen as special- purpose tools. In comparison to their traditional cousins, scripting languages emphasize ﬂex- ibility and richness of expression over sheer run-time performance. Common characteristics include both batch and interactive use, economy of expression,

DESIGN & IMPLEMENTATION

14.13 Worse Is Better Any discussion of the relative merits of scripting and “systems” languages in- variably ends up addressing the tradeoffs between expressivenessand ﬂexibility on the one hand and compile-time safety and performance on the other. It may also digress into questions of “quick-and-dirty” versus “polished” applications. An interesting take on this debate can be found in the widely circulated essays of Richard Gabriel (www.dreamsongs.com/WorseIsBetter.html). While working for Lucid Corp. in 1989, Gabriel found himself asking why Unix and C had been so successful at attracting users, while Common Lisp (Lucid’s principal focus) had not. His explanation contrasts “The Right Thing,” as exempliﬁed by Common Lisp, with a “Worse Is Better” philosophy, as exempliﬁed by C and Unix. “The Right Thing” emphasizes complete, correct, consistent, and ele- gant design. “Worse Is Better” emphasizes the rapid development of software that does most of what users need most of the time, and can be tuned and im- proved incrementally, based on ﬁeld experience. Much of scripting, and Perl in particular, ﬁts the “Worse Is Better” philosophy (Ruby and Scheme enthusiasts might beg to disagree). Gabriel, for his part, says he still hasn’t made up his mind; his essays argue both points of view.

