# 14.8 Bibliographic Notes

respect to Perl 5. What do you think of these changes? If you were in charge of the revision, what would you do differently? 14.30 Learn about AJAX, a collection of web technologies that allows a JavaScript program to interact with web servers “in the background,” to dynamically update a page in a browser after its initial loading. What kinds of ap- plications can you build in AJAX that you couldn’t easily build otherwise? What features of JavaScript are most important for making the technology work? 14.31 Learn about Dart, a language developed at Google. Initially intended as a successor to JavaScript, Dart is now supported only as a language in which to develop code that will be translated into JavaScript. What explains the change in strategy? What are the odds that some other competitor to JavaScript will emerge in future years?

14.32–14.35 In More Depth. 14.8 Bibliographic Notes

Most of the major scripting languages and their predecessors are described in books by the language designers or their close associates: awk [AKW88], Perl [CfWO12], PHP [TML13], Python [vRD11], and Ruby [TFH13]. Several of these books have versions available on-line. Most of the languages are also de- scribed in a variety of other texts, and most have dedicated web sites: perl.org, php.net, python.org, ruby-lang.org. Extensive documentation for Perl is pre- installed on many machines; type man perl for an index. Rexx [Ame96a] was standardized by ANSI, the American National Standards Institute. JavaScript [ECM11] is standardized by ECMA, the European stan- dards body. Guile (gnu.org/software/guile/) is GNU’s Scheme implementation for scripting. Standards for the World Wide Web, including HTML5, XML, XSL, XPath, and XSLT, are promulgated by the World Wide Web Consortium: www.w3.org. For those updating their pages to HTML5, the validation service at validator.w3.org is particularly useful. High-quality tutorials on many web- related topics can be found at w3schools.com. Hauben and Hauben [HH97a] describe the historical roots of the Internet, including early work on Unix. Original articles on the various Unix shell lan- guages include those of Mashey [Mas76], Bourne [Bou78], and Korn [Kor94]. The original reference on APL is by Iverson [Ive62]. Ousterhout [Ous98] makes the case for scripting languages in general, and Tcl in particular. Chonacky and Winch [CW05] compare and contrast Maple, Mathematica, and Matlab. Richard Gabriel’s collection of “Worse Is Better” papers can be found at www.dreamsongs. com/WorseIsBetter.html. A similar comparison of Tcl and Scheme can be found in the introductory chapter of Abelson, Greenspun, and Sandon’s on-line Tcl for Web Nerds guide (philip.greenspun.com/tcl/index.adp).

