# 10.6 True Multiple Inheritance

10.6 True Multiple Inheritance 521

10.6 True Multiple Inheritance

As described in Section 10.5, mix-in inheritance allows an interface to specify functionality that must be provided by an inheriting class in order for objects of that class to be used in a given context. Crucially, an interface does not, for the most part, provide that functionality itself. Even default methods serve mainly to orchestrate access to functionality provided by the inheriting class. At times it can be useful to inherit real functionality from more than one base class. Suppose, for example, that our administrative computing system needs EXAMPLE 10.56

Deriving from two base classes to keep track of information about every system user, and that the university provides every student with an account. It may then be desirable to derive class student from both person and system_user. In C++ we can say

class student : public person, public system_user { ...

Now an object of class student will have all the ﬁelds and methods of both a person and a system_user. The declaration in Eiffel is analogous:

class student inherit person system_user feature ... ■

True multiple inheritance appears in several other languages as well, including CLOS, OCaml, and Python. Many older languages, including Simula, Smalltalk, Modula-3, and Oberon, provided only single inheritance. Mix-in inheritance is a common compromise.

IN MORE DEPTH

Multiple inheritance introduces a wealth of semantic and pragmatic issues, which we consider on the companion site:

Suppose two parent classes provide a method with the same name. Which one do we use in the child? Can we access both? Suppose two parent classes are both derived from some common “grandpar- ent” class. Does the “grandchild” have one copy or two of the grandparent’s ﬁelds? Our implementation of single inheritance relies on the fact that the represen- tation of an object of the parent class is a preﬁx of the representation of an object of a derived class. With multiple inheritance, how can each parent be a preﬁx of the child?

