# Chapter 5: Target Machine Architecture

## **5**

## **Target Machine Architecture**

**As described in Chapter 1,** a compiler is simply a translator. It translates
programs written in one language into programs written in another language.
This second language can be almost anything—some other high-level language,
phototypesetting commands, VLSI (chip) layouts—but most of the time it’s the
machine language for some available computer.
Just as there are many different programming languages, there are many differ-
ent machine languages, though the latter tend to display considerably less diver-
sity than the former. Each machine language corresponds to a different* processor*
*architecture*. Formally, an architecture is the interface between the hardware and
the software—that is, the language generated by a compiler, or by a programmer
writing for the bare machine. The* implementation* of the processor is a concrete
realization of the architecture, generally in hardware. To generate correct code, it
sufﬁces for a compiler writer to understand the target architecture. To generate
*fast* code, it is generally necessary to understand the implementation as well, be-
cause it is the implementation that determines the relative speeds of alternative
translations of a given language construct.

**IN MORE DEPTH**

Chapter 5 can be found in its entirety on the companion site. It provides a brief
overview of those aspects of processor architecture and implementation of partic-
ular importance to compiler writers, and may be worth reviewing even by readers
who have seen the material before. Principal topics include data representation,
instruction set architecture, the evolution of implementation techniques, and the
challenges of compiling for modern processors. Examples are drawn largely from
the x86, a legacy CISC (complex instruction set) architecture that dominates the
desktop/laptop market, and the ARM, a more modern RISC (reduced instruction
set) design that dominates the embedded, smart phone, and tablet markets.

**217**

