# Part I: Foundations

I Foundations

A central premise of Programming Language Pragmatics is that language design and implemen- tation are intimately connected; it’s hard to study one without the other. The bulk of the text—Parts II and III—is organized around topics in language design, but with detailed coverage throughout of the many ways in which design decisions have been shaped by implementation concerns. The ﬁrst ﬁve chapters—Part I—set the stage by covering foundational material in both design and implementation. Chapter 1 motivates the study of programming languages, in- troduces the major language families, and provides an overview of the compilation process. Chapter 3 covers the high-level structure of programs, with an emphasis on names, the bind- ing of names to objects, and the scope rules that govern which bindings are active at any given time. In the process it touches on storage management; subroutines, modules, and classes; polymorphism; and separate compilation. Chapters 2, 4, and 5 are more implementation oriented. They provide the background needed to understand the implementation issues mentioned in Parts II and III. Chapter 2 discusses the syntax, or textual structure, of programs. It introduces regular expressions and context-free grammars, which designers use to describe program syntax, together with the scan- ning and parsing algorithms that a compiler or interpreter uses to recognize that syntax. Given an understanding of syntax, Chapter 4 explains how a compiler (or interpreter) determines the semantics, or meaning of a program. The discussion is organized around the notion of at- tribute grammars, which serve to map a program onto something else that has meaning, such as mathematics or some other existing language. Finally, Chapter 5 (entirely on the companion site) provides an overview of assembly-level computer architecture, focusing on the features of modern microprocessors most relevant to compilers. Programmers who understand these fea- tures have a better chance not only of understanding why the languages they use were designed the way they were, but also of using those languages as fully and effectively as possible.

